---
layout: posts
title: "Cgroups and containers"
---

In addition to namespaces, Linux Containers makes use of a feature named Cgroups, which allows limiting the resources of a group of processes. Such resources include CPU, disk I/O and memory.

There is good [documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/cgroup-v1/cgroups.txt) in the kernel. Though 
it's somewhat outdated, the concepts are well explained.

## What are cgroups

From the kernel documentation: Cgroups permit aggregating/partitioning sets of processes and their future children into hierarchies with special behaviour. A cgroup associates three types of objects: Processes, subsystems (CPU, I/O etc) and parameters. For example, a group of processes might be associated to the block I/O subsystem and a parameter that limits their collective block I/O rate.

This is a very broad definition. In the context of containers, the parameters are likely to be limits.

A subsystem is anything that wants to act on a group of processes. This discussion focuses on resource controllers that schedule resources or apply limits.

Cgroups can be organised hierarchically into trees of cgroups and set of subsystems. Such a hierarchy is reflected by the cgroup virtual filesystem, mounted at /sys/fs/cgroup on Centos.

A process is in at most one cgroup in a hierarchy. Each hierarchy is a partition of all processes in the system. Multiple hierarchies ensure that different subsystems can partition processes in their own ways.

Possibly user activities on cgroups: Create, destroy a cgroup; set and query a process' cgroup; list processes in a cgroup. There are no separate Cgroups system calls; rather, they are accessed via the cgroup virtual filesystem.

## Workflow

* mount -t cgroup, provide subsystems as options
  e.g mount -t cgroup -o memory,cpuset
* the filesystem has a tasks file that contains PIDs controlled by it
* the filesystem has control files that allow limiting and reporting on 
  resources
* the highest level of a subsystem's cgroup contains all processes initially
* use mkdir to create a subgroup and echo PIDs into the tasks file. Those
  processes will be moved into the subgroup. Modify control files.

## Example: Throttle IO with cgroups

- <code>mkdir /sys/fs/cgroup/blkio/low-io</code>
- Launch two long-running dd processes, e.g. <code>dd if=/dev/sda of=/dev/null</code>
  and add one of their PIDs to <code>/sys/fs/cgroup/blkio/low-io/tasks</code>
- throttle bytes per second: <code>echo "8:0 10000" > low-io/blkio.throttle.read_bps_device</code>
  where 8:0 is /dev/sda
- <code>kill -USR1 PID of throttled dd process</code> to display the throughput.
  Repeat the kill a few times and observe how the IO rate goes down
  NOTE: Signal processing may take a few seconds

Rather than bps (blocks per second), the same test can also be done with IOPS

Another option for throttling I/O is by associating a relative I/O weight to cgroups. For this to work, the CFQ scheduler must be put in place e.g. <code>echo cfq > /sys/block/sda/queue/scheduler</code>.
